Sidney, welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
It's awesome to have you here.
I am too.
We're going to talk about Pydantic, one of my very favorite libraries that just makes working with Python, data, and data exchange so, so easy, which is awesome.
It's really cool that you're on the Pydantic team these days.
Before then, I guess, let's jump back just a little bit.
A few weeks ago, got to meet up a little bit in Pittsburgh at PyCon.
How was PyCon for you?
It was great. It was my first PyCon experience ever. It was a very, very large conference, so it was a cool kind of first introductory conference experience.
I had just graduated not even a week before, so it was a fun way to kind of roll into full-time work
and get exposed really to the Python community.
It was great to just kind of have a mix of getting to give a talk, getting to attend lots of awesome presentations,
and then most of all just meeting a bunch of really awesome people in the community.
I always love how many people you get to meet from so many different places and perspectives.
It just reminds you the world is really big, but also really small.
You get to meet your friends and new people from all over the place.
Definitely. I was impressed by the number of international attendees. I didn't really expect that. It was great.
Yeah, same here.
Maybe a quick introduction for yourself for those who didn't hear your previous episode,
and then we'll talk a bit about this Pydantic library.
Yeah, sure. Sounds great. My name is Sydney. I just graduated from the University of Wisconsin.
Last time I chatted with you, I was still pursuing my degree in computer science
and working part-time as an intern at the company Pydantic,
which is kind of founded around the same ideas that inspired the open source tool,
and now we're building commercial tools.
I work with them primarily on the open source side.
Very excited to be contributing to the open source community,
but also getting to help with our commercial tools and development there.
Yeah, awesome. We'll talk a bit about that later.
Super cool to be able to work on open source as a proper job, right?
I've kind of encouraged lots of people to contribute to open source as kind of a jumpstart
into their software development careers, especially young folks who are looking to get started with things
and maybe don't have an internship or that sort of thing set up yet.
I think it's a really awesome pipeline for getting exposed to good code and collaborating with others and that sort of thing,
but it's definitely special to get to do and get paid as well.
So it's a little bit unbelievable to me, but I'm sure that it is true
that there are folks out there listening to the podcast that are like, "Pydantic. Maybe I've heard of that.
What is this Pydantic thing?"
So Pydantic is the leading data validation library for Python.
And so Pydantic uses type hints, which are optional in Python,
but it's kind of generally more and more encouraged to enforce constraints on data
and kind of validate data structures, etc.
So we're kind of looking at a very simple example together right now where we're importing things like
date time and tuple types from typing. And then kind of the core of Pydantic
is you define these classes that inherit from this class called BaseModel that's in Pydantic.
And that inheritance is what ends up helping you use methods to validate data,
build JSON schema, things like that. And so in our case, we have this delivery class that has a timestamp,
which is of type date time, and then a dimensions tuple, which has two int parts.
And so then when you pass data into this delivery class to create an instance,
Pydantic handles validating that data to make sure that it conforms to those constraints we've specified.
And so it's really a kind of intermediate tool that you can use for deserialization or loading data
and then serialization, dumping data.
It's a thing of beauty. I really love the way that it works. If you've got JSON data, nested JSON data,
if you go to pydantic.dev/opensource, there's an example of here that we're talking about.
It's got a tuple, but the tuple contains integers, two of them.
And so if there's a tuple of three things, it'll give you an error.
If it's a tuple of a date time and an int, it'll give you an error.
It reaches all the way inside.
Things I guess it compares against, it's a little bit like data classes.
Have you done much with data classes and compared them?
Yeah, that's a great question. So we actually offer support for Pydantic data classes.
So I think data classes kind of took the first step of really supporting using type hints for model fields
and things like that. And then Pydantic sort of takes the next jump in terms of validation and schema support.
And so I think one very common use case is if you're defining API request and response models,
you can imagine the JSON schema capabilities come in handy there.
And just ensuring the integrity of your API and the data you're dealing with, very helpful in the validation front.
Yeah, very cool.
Okay, well, I guess one more thing for people who are not super familiar with it.
Pydantic is, I think it's used every now and then. Let's check it out on GitHub here.
I'm just trying to think of some of the main places people have heard of it.
Obviously, FastAPI, I think, is the thing that really launched its popularity in the early days, if I had to guess.
But if we go over to GitHub, GitHub says that for the open source things,
that Pydantic is a foundational dependency for 412,644 different projects.
That's unbelievable.
Yeah, it's very exciting. We just got our May download numbers and heard that we have over 200 million downloads in May.
So that's both version one and version two, but definitely exciting to see how kind of critical of a tool it's become
for so many different use cases in Python, which is awesome.
Yeah, absolutely. It's really, really critical.
I think we should probably talk a little bit about Pydantic v1, v2 as a way to get into the architecture conversation.
That was a big thing I talked to Samuel Colvin maybe a year ago or so, I would imagine.
I think around PyCon, I think we did actually a PyCon last year as well.
Yeah, for sure. So a lot of the benefit of using Pydantic is we promise some great performance.
And a lot of those performance gains came during our jump from v1 to v2.
So v1 was written solely in Python. We had some compiled options, but really it was mostly Pythonic data validation.
I say Pythonic, it's always Pythonic, but data validation done solely in Python.
And the big difference with v2 is that we rewrote kind of the core of our code in Rust.
And so Rust is much faster. And so depending on what kind of code you're running, v2 can be, you know,
anywhere from two to 20 times faster in certain cases.
So right now we still have this Python wrapper around everything in v2.
But then, and that's kind of used to define schemas for models and that sort of thing.
And then the actual validation and serialization logic occurs in Pydantic core in Rust.
Right. So I think the team did a really good job to make this major change, this major rewrite,
and split the whole monolithic thing into a Pydantic core, Pydantic itself, which is Python based,
in a way that didn't break too many projects, right?
Yeah, that was the goal. You know, every now and then there are breaking changes that I think
are generally a good thing for the library moving forward, right?
Like hopefully whenever we make a breaking change, it's because it's leading to a significant improvement.
But we definitely do our best to avoid breaking changes.
And certainly someday we'll launch a v3 and hopefully that'll be an even more seamless transition for v2 users to v3 users.
Yeah, I would imagine that the switch to Rust probably, that big rewrite,
it probably caused a lot of thoughts of reconsidering, "How are we doing this?"
Or, "Now that it's over in Rust, maybe it doesn't make sense this way," or whatever.
Yeah, and I think just kind of, you know, we got a lot of feedback and usage of Pydantic v1,
so tried to do our best to incorporate all that feedback into a better v2 version
in terms of both APIs and performance and that sort of thing.
Sure, sure.
John out in the audience asks, "How does the team approach thread safety with this?"
So Rust can be multiple threads easy.
Python, not so much really, although maybe soon with free-threaded Python.
Yeah, that's a good question.
So our kind of Rust guru on the team is David Hewitt, and he's very in the know about all of the multi-threading
and things happening on the Rust side of things.
I myself have some more to learn about that, certainly.
But I think in general, kind of our approach is that Rust is quite type-safe,
both performant and type-safe, which is great, and memory-safe as well.
And I think most of our-- I'll talk a little bit later about some, like, parallelization
and vectorization that we're looking at for performance improvements,
but in terms of safety, I think if you have any questions, feel free to open an issue on the Pydantic core repo
and we can get a conversation going with David Hewitt.
I would imagine it's not-- you guys haven't had to do too much with it,
just that Python currently, but soon-- but currently doesn't really let you do much true multi-threading
because of the GIL.
The whole-- I think, you know-- yeah, I think Python 3.13 is going to be crazy with free-threaded Python
and it's going to be interesting to see how that evolves.
Yeah, I know we definitely do some jumping through hoops and just, you know,
having to be really conscious of stuff with the GIL in Pydantic core and Py03,
and Py03 is kind of the library that bridges Python and Rust,
and so it's heavily used in Pydantic core, as you can imagine.
So I'm excited to see what changes might look like there.
Yeah, same.
All right, well, let's jump into the performance
because you're here to tell us all about Pydantic performance tips,
and you've got a whole bunch of these.
Did you give this talk at PyCon?
I did, partially.
It's a little bit different, but some of the tips are the same.
I don't think the videos are out yet, are they?
At the time of recording on June 13th.
Yeah, no, I actually checked a couple of minutes ago.
I was like, "I said one thing during my talk that I wanted to double-check,
but the videos are not out yet."
No, I'm really excited.
There's going to be a bunch--
There was actually a bunch of good talks, including yours and some others.
I want to watch, but they're not out yet.
All right, let's jump into Pydantic performance.
Where should we start?
I can start on the slideshow if we want.
Yeah, let's do that.
Awesome.
So, yeah, I think kind of the categories of performance tips
that we're going to talk about here
kind of have some fast, one-liner type performance tips
that you can implement in your own code.
And then kind of the meat of the, like,
how do I improve performance in my application that uses Pydantic?
We're going to talk a bit about discriminated unions,
also called tag unions.
And then kind of finally talk about, on our end of the development,
how are we continuously improving performance,
you know, Pydantic internals-wise, et cetera.
Sure. Do you all have the equivalent of unit tests for performance?
Yeah, we do.
We use a library called CodSpeed
that I'm excited to touch on a bit more later.
Yeah, all right, let's talk about that later. Perfect.
Yeah, sure thing.
So I have this slide up right now
just kind of talking about why people use Pydantic.
We've already covered some of these, but just kind of as a general recap,
it's powered by type hints,
and one of our biggest promises is speed.
We also have these other great features
like JSON schema compatibility and documentation
comes in particularly handy when we talk about APIs,
you know, support for custom validation and serialization logic.
And then as we saw with the GitHub repository observations,
a very robust ecosystem of libraries and other tools
that use and depend on Pydantic
that leads to this kind of extensive and large community,
which is really great.
So this all kind of lies on the foundation of like Pydantic is easy to use
and it's very fast.
Yeah, and this, yeah, well, the speed is really interesting
in the multiplier that you all have
for basically a huge swath of the Python ecosystem, right?
We just saw the 412,000 things that depend on Pydantic.
Well, a lot of those,
their performance depends on Pydantic's performance as well, right?
Yeah, certainly.
Yeah, it's nice to have such a large ecosystem of folks
to also contribute to the library as well, right?
Because other people are dependent on our performance,
the community definitely becomes invested in it as well, which is great.
Yeah, I bet.
But yeah, so kind of as that first category,
we can chat about some basic performance tips.
And I'll do my best here to kind of describe this generally
for listeners who maybe aren't able to see the screen.
So when you are--
Can we share your slideshow later with the audience?
Can we put it in the show notes?
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
Okay, so people want to go back and check it out.
But yeah, we'll describe it for everyone.
Go ahead.
Yeah, so when you're validating data in Pydantic,
you can either validate Python objects or like dictionary-type data
or you can validate JSON-formatted data.
And so one of these kind of like one-liner tips that we have
is to use our built-in model validate JSON method
instead of calling this our model validate method
and then separately loading the JSON data with the standard libJSON package.
And the reason that we recommend that is one of the like crux
of the general performance patterns that we try to follow
is not materializing things in Python when we don't have to.
So we've already mentioned that our core is written in Rust,
which is much faster than Python.
And so with our model validate JSON built-in method,
whenever you pass in that string, we send it right to Rust.
Whereas if you do the JSON loading by yourself,
you're going to like materialize Python object
and then have to send it over.
Right, and so you're going to be using the built-in JSON load S,
which will then, or load or whatever, and then it'll pull that in,
turn it into a Python dictionary, then you take it
and try to convert that back to a Rust data structure
and then validate it in Rust.
That's where all the validation lives anyway.
So just get out of the way, right?
Exactly, yep. It's like skip the Python step if you can, right?
And I will note there is one exception here,
which is I mentioned we support custom validation.
If you're using what we call like before and wrap validators
that do something in Python and then call our internal validation logic
and then maybe even do something after, it's okay.
You can use model validate and the built-in JSON.load S
because you're already kind of guaranteed to be materializing
Python objects in that case.
But for the vast majority of cases, it's great to just go with
the built-in model validate JSON.
Yeah, that's really good advice.
And they seem kind of equivalent, but once you know the internals,
right, then it's, well, maybe it's not exactly.
Yeah, and I think implementing some of these tips is helpful
in that if you understand some of the kind of like
Pydantic architectural context, it can also just help you think more
about like how can I write my Pydantic code better.
Absolutely.
So the next tip I have here, very easy one-liner fix,
which is when you're using type adapter,
which is this structure you can use to basically validate one type.
So we have base models, which we've chatted about before,
which is like if you have a model with lots of fields,
that's kind of the structure you use to define it.
Well, type adapter is great if you're like,
"I just want to validate that this data is a list of integers,"
for example, as we're seeing on the screen.
Right, because let me give people an idea.
Like if you accept, if you've got a JSON,
well, just JSON data from wherever, but a lot of times it's coming over an API
or it's provided to you as a file and it's not your data you control, right,
you're trying to validate it, you could get a dictionary JSON object
that's got curly braces with a bunch of stuff,
in which case that's easy to map to a class.
But if you just have JSON, which is bracket, thing, thing, thing, thing,
close bracket, well, how do you have a class that represents a list?
Like it gets really tricky, right, to be able to understand.
You can't model that with classes.
And so you all have this type adapter thing, right?
That's what the role plays generally.
Is that right?
Yeah, and I think it's also really helpful in a testing context.
Like, you know, when we want to check that our validation behavior is right
for one type, there's no reason to go, like, build an entire model.
If you're really just validating against one type or structure,
type adapter is great.
And so kind of the advice here is you only want to initialize
your type adapter object once.
And the reason behind that is we build a core schema in Python
and then attach that to a class or type adapter, et cetera.
And so if you can not build that type adapter within your loop,
but instead do it right before or not build it in your function,
but instead outside of it, then you can avoid building the core schema
over and over again.
Yeah, so basically what you're saying is that the type adapter
that you create might as well be a singleton because it's stateless, right?
Like, it doesn't store any data.
It's kind of slightly expensive to create, relatively.
And so if you had a function that was called over and over again
and that function had a loop, and inside the loop you're creating
the type adapter, that'd be like worst case scenario almost, right?
Yeah, exactly.
And I think this kind of goes along with general best programming tips, right?
Which is like, if you only need to create something once, do that once.
Exactly.
And then the other way way way back in time could be like
a compiled regular expression.
You wouldn't do that over and over in a loop.
You would just create a regular compiled regular expression
and then use it throughout your program, right?
Because it's kind of expensive to do that, but it's fast once it's created.
Yeah, exactly. And funny that you mentioned that.
I actually fixed a bug last week where we were compiling regular expressions
twice when folks specified that as a constraint on a field.
So definitely just something to keep in mind and easy to fix
or implement with type adapters here.
Yeah, awesome. Okay, I like this one. That's a good one.
Yeah.
So this next tip also kind of goes along with general best practices,
but the more specific you can be with your type hints, the better.
And so specifically,
if you know that you have a list of integers,
it's better and more efficient to specify a type hint
as a list of integers instead of a sequence of integers, for example.
Or if you know you have a dictionary
that maps strings to integers,
specify that type hint as a dictionary, not a mapping.
Interesting.
Yeah, so you could import a sequence from the typing module,
which is the generic way,
but I guess you probably have specific code that runs
that can validate lists more efficiently
than a general iterable type of thing, right?
Yeah, exactly. So in the case of a sequence versus a list,
it's the square and rectangle thing, right?
A list is a sequence, but there are lots of other types of sequences.
And so you can imagine for a sequence,
we have to check lots of other things, whereas if you know
with certainty this is going to be a list or it should be a list,
then you can have things be more efficient with specificity there.
Does it make any difference at all
whether you use the more modern type specifications?
Traditionally, people would say
"from typing import capital LLIST,"
but now you can just say lowercase LLIST
with the built-in and no import statement?
Are those equivalent or is there some minor difference there?
Do you know?
Yeah, that's a good question.
I wouldn't be surprised if there was a minor difference
in the type specifications.
I suppose you could import the old capital LLIST in a newer Python version,
but I think the difference is more related to specificity of a type hint
rather than versioning.
If the use of that capital LLIST
made you write an import statement,
it would cause the program to start
ever so slightly slower because there's another import.
It's got to run, whereas it already knows.
It's already imported what LLIST is.
You wouldn't believe how many times I get messages
on YouTube videos I've done or even from courses
saying, "Michael, I don't know what you're doing,
but your code is just wrong.
I wrote lowercase LLIST bracket something
and it said LLIST is not sub-indexable
or something like that.
Look, you've just done it wrong.
Or you're on Python 3.7 or something super old
before these new features were added.
There's just somewhere in the community we haven't
communicated this well, I don't know.
Yeah, for sure. I was writing some code earlier today
in a meeting and I used the from typing import union
and then union x and y type.
My coworker was like, "Cindy, use the pipe.
What are you doing?"
Here's the thing, that was introduced in 3.10, I believe.
If people are in 3.9, that code doesn't run
or if they're not familiar with the changes.
There's all these trade-offs.
I almost feel like it would be amazing to go back
for any time there's a security release that releases
say another 3.7 or something and change the error message
to say, "This feature only works in the future version
of Python rather than some arbitrary error
that's wrong." That would be great.
Yeah, definitely. Some of those errors can be pretty cryptic
with the syntax stuff.
Be specific, list tuple, not sequence if you know it's a list
or a tuple or whatever.
Then my last minor tip, which great that you brought up
import statements and adding general time
to a program.
I don't have a slide for this one, but if we go back
to the slide, we talked about the fact that initializing
this type adapter builds a core schema
and attaches it to that class.
That's done at build time,
at import time. That's already done.
If you really don't want
to have that import or build time
take a long time, you can use the
defer build flag. What that does
is defers the core schema build until the first
validation call. You can also set that on model config
and things like that. Basically, the idea here is
striving to be lazier.
If we don't need to build this core schema right at import time
because we want our program to start up quickly,
that's great. We might have a little bit of a delay on the first
validation, but maybe startup time is more important.
That's a little bit more of a preferential
performance tip, but available for folks who need it.
Let me give you an example.
I'll give people an example where I think this might be useful.
In the Talk Python training, the courses site,
I think we've got 20,000 lines of Python code,
which is probably more at this point. I checked a long time ago.
But a lot. It's a package.
When you import it, it imports all the stuff
to run the whole web app, but also little utilities
like, "Oh, I just want to get a quick report.
I want to just access this model and then use it
on something real quick." It imports all that stuff
so that app startup would be potentially slowed down by this.
Where if you know only sometimes is that type adapter used,
you don't want to necessarily have it completely created
until that function gets called.
Then the first function call might be a little slow,
but there'd be plenty of times where maybe it never gets called, right?
- Yeah, definitely. - Yeah, awesome.
- Okay. Very good. - All right.
A more complex performance optimization is using tagged unions.
They're still pretty simple.
It's just a little bit more than a one-line change.
Talking about tagged unions,
we can go through a basic example,
why we're using tagged unions in the first place,
and then some more advanced examples.
- Let's start with what are tagged unions,
because I honestly have no idea. I know what unions are,
but tagging them, I don't know. - Yeah, sure thing.
Tagged unions are a special type of union.
We also call them discriminated unions.
They help you specify a member of a model
that you can use for discrimination in your validation.
What that means is if you have two models
that are pretty similar,
your field can be either one of those types of models,
model X or model Y.
But you know that there's one tag or discriminator field that differs.
You can specifically validate against that field
and skip some of the other validation.
I'll move on to an example here in a second,
but basically it helps you validate more efficiently
because you get to skip validation of some fields.
It's really helpful if you have models that have 100 fields,
but one of them is really indicative of what type it might be.
- I see. So instead of trying to figure out
is it all of this stuff, once you know
it has this aspect or that aspect,
then you can branch it on a path and just treat it as
one of the elements of the union. Is that right?
- Yes, exactly. One other note about
discriminated unions is you specify this discriminator,
and it can either be a string literal type or a callable type.
We'll look at some examples of both.
Here's a more concrete example so we can
really better understand this.
Let's say we have a classic example,
a cat model and a dog model.
- Yeah. Cat people and dog people. You're going to start a debate here.
- Exactly. They both have this
pet type field. For the
cat model, it's a literal that is just
the string cat. For the dog model, it's the
literal that's the string dog. It's just kind of a flag
on a model to indicate what type it is.
You can imagine in this basic case, we only have a couple of
fields attached to each model, but maybe
this is like data in a
vet database. You can imagine there's going to be tons of fields
attached to this. It'd be pretty helpful
to just be able to look at it and say, "Oh, the pet type is dog.
Let's make sure this data is valid for a dog
type." I'll also note we have a lizard in here.
What this looks like in terms of validation with Pydantic, then,
is that when we specify this pet field,
we just add one extra setting
which says that the discriminator is that pet type field.
Then, when we pass in data that
corresponds to a dog model, Pydantic is smart
enough to say, "Oh, this is a discriminated union field.
Let me go look for the pet type
field on the model and just see what that is,
and then use that to inform my decision for
what type I should validate against."
That's awesome. If we don't set the discriminator
keyword value in
the field for the union, it'll still
work, right? It just has to be more exhaustive
and slow. Yeah, exactly. It'll still
validate and it'll say, "Hey, let's take this input data
and try to validate it against the cat model."
Then, Pydantic will come back and say, "Oh, that's not a valid cat.
Let's try the next one." Whereas with this discriminated
pattern, we can skip right to the dog, which
you can imagine helps us skip some of the other steps.
Yeah, absolutely. Okay, that's really cool. I had no idea about this.
Yeah, it's a cool, I'd say,
moderate-level feature. I think if you're just starting to
use Pydantic, you probably haven't touched discriminated unions
much, but we hope that it's simple enough to implement that
most folks can use it if they're using unions.
Yeah, that's cool. I don't use unions very often, which is probably why,
other than symptom pipe none, which is
optional. But if I did,
I'll definitely remember this.
Alrighty, so as I've mentioned,
this helps for more efficient validation. And then where this
really comes and has a lot of value is when you
are dealing with lots of nested models or models that have
tons of fields. So let's say you have a union with, like,
10 members, and each member of the union has 100 fields.
If you can just do validation against 100 fields instead of
1,000, that would be great in terms of a
performance gain. And then, once again, with nested models,
if you can skip lots of those union
member validations, also going to boost your performance.
Yeah, for sure. You know an example where this seems
very likely would be
using it with Beanie or some other document
database where the modeling structure is very hierarchical.
You end up with a lot of nested
sub-identic models in there.
Yeah, very much so.
So as a little bit of an added benefit, we can talk
about this improved error handling, which is a great way to
kind of visualize why the discriminated union pattern
is more efficient. So right now we're looking at an example
of validation against a model
that doesn't use a discriminated union, and the
errors are not very nice to look at. You basically see
the errors for every single
permutation of the different values, and we're using nested
models, so it's very hard to interpret.
So we don't have to look at this for too long. It's not
very nice, but if we look at...
But basically the error message says, "Look, there's something
wrong with the union. If it was a string, it is missing these
things. If it was this kind of thing, it misses those things.
If it was a dog, it misses this. If it's a cat, it
misses that." And it doesn't specifically tell you.
Exactly. It's a dog, so it's missing
the collar size or whatever, right?
Right, exactly. But then, and I'll go back and
kind of explain the discriminated model for this case in a
second, but if you look at this is the model with
the discriminated union instead, we have one
very nice error that says, "Okay, you're trying to
validate this X field
and it's the wrong type, right?"
So, yeah.
The first example that we were looking at was using string
type discriminators. So, we just had this pet type thing that
said, "Oh, this is a cat," or "This is a dog," that sort of
thing. We also offer some more
customization in terms of we also
allow callable discriminators. So, in this
case, this field can be either
a string or this instance
of discriminated model. So, it's kind of a
recursive pattern, right? And that's where you can imagine
the nested structures becoming very complex
very easily. And we use this
kind of callable to differentiate
between which model we should validate against
and then we tag each of the cases.
So, a little bit more of a complex application here, but
once again, when you kind of see the benefit in terms of errors
and interpreting things and performance, I think it's
generally a worthwhile investment.
So, if you wanted something like a composite
key equivalent of a discriminator,
if it has this field
and its nested model is of this type,
it's one thing versus another.
Like a free user versus a paying user,
you might have to look and see their total lifetime value plus
that they're a registered user. I don't know.
You could write code that would pull that information out and
then you could use that to validate against
which thing to validate against, right?
Yeah, exactly. Yeah, it definitely comes in handy when you have like,
you're like, "Okay, well, I still want the performance benefits of a
discriminated union, but I kind of have three fields
on each model that are indicative of which one I should validate against."
And it's like, well, you know, taking the time to
look at those three fields over the hundred is definitely
worth it. Just a little bit of complexity for the developer.
One other note here is that
Can we go back really quick on that previous one?
So I got a quick question. So for this, you write a function.
It's given the
value that comes in, which could be a
string, it could be a dictionary, etc.
Could you do a little bit
further performance improvements and add like
func tools, LRU cache to
cache the output so every time it sees the same thing,
if there's a repeated data through your validation, it goes, "I already know what it is."
What do you think? Yeah, I do think that would be
possible. That's definitely an optimization we should try out and put in our
docs for like the advanced, advanced performance tips.
Yeah, because if you've got a thousand strings
and then you know that word like it's
maybe male, female, male, female, male, male,
female, like that kind of where the data is repeated a bunch,
then it could just
go, "Yep, we already know that answer."
Potentially, I don't know. Yeah, no, definitely.
And I will say I don't know if it takes effect.
I don't think it takes effect with discriminated unions because this logic
is kind of in Python, but I will say
we recently added a like string caching setting
because we have kind of our own JSON parsing
logic that we use in Pydantic Core. And so we added
a string caching setting so that you don't have to
rebuild the exact same strings every time.
So that's a nice performance boost.
Caching is awesome. Until it's not.
Exactly. So one quick note here
is just that discriminated unions are still JSON schema
compatible, which is awesome for
the case where you're once again defining like API requests
and responses, you want to still have valid JSON schema coming out of
those models. Yeah, very cool.
And that might show up in things like
open API documentation and stuff like that, right?
Yep, exactly.
So I'll kind of skip over this. We already touched on the
callable discriminators, and then
I'll leave these slides up here as a reference again.
I don't think this is worth touching in too much detail, but
just kind of another comment about if you've got
nested models, that still works well with
discriminated unions. So we're still on the pet example,
but let's say this time you have a white cat
and a black cat model, and then you also have
your existing dog model. You can still
create a union of
your cat union is a union of black cat
and white cat, and then you can union that with the dogs
and it still works. And once again, you can kind of imagine
the exponential blow up that would occur if you
didn't use some sort of discriminator here in terms of errors.
Yeah, very interesting. Okay, cool.
Yeah, so that's kind of
all in terms of my recommendations for
discriminated union application. I would encourage folks who are
interested in this to check out our documentation.
It's pretty thorough in that regard, and I think we also have those links
attached to the podcast.
Yeah, absolutely.
And then performance improvements in the pipeline. Is this something that
we can control from the outside? Is this something that you all are just
adding for us in the next version?
Yeah, good question. This is hopefully, maybe not all in the next version,
but just kind of things we're keeping our eyes on in terms of
requested performance improvements and ideas that we have.
I'll go a little bit out of order here. We've been talking a bunch
about core schema and kind of
how we're trying to optimize that, or
just trying to optimize that, and that actually happens in Python.
So one of the biggest things that we're trying to do is
effectively speed up the core schema building process so that
import times are faster and just
Pydantic is more performant in general.
Cool.
So one thing that
I'd like to ask about
back on the Python side a little bit,
suppose I've got some really large document,
really nested document.
Maybe I've converted some terrible XML thing into JSON
or I don't know, something. And there's a little bit of
structured schema that I care about, and then there's a whole bunch
of other stuff that I could potentially
create nested models to go to, but I don't
really care about validating them. It's just whatever it is, it is.
What if you just said that was a dictionary?
Would that short-circuit a whole bunch of validation and stuff
that would make it faster, potentially?
Could it turn off the validation for a subset
of the model if it's really big and deep
and you don't really care for that part?
Yeah, good question. So we offer an annotation called
skip validation that you can apply to certain types.
So that's kind of one approach. I think in the future
it would be nice to offer a config setting so that you can
more easily list features that you want to skip
validation for instead of applying those on a field-by-field basis.
And then the other thing is, if you only define
your model in terms of the fields that you really care about
from that very gigantic amount of data,
we will just ignore the extra data that you pass in
and pull out the relevant information.
Right, okay. Good.
Back to the pipeline.
Yeah, back to the pipeline.
So another improvement, we talked a little bit about
potential parallelization of things or vectorization.
One thing that I'm excited to learn more about in the future
and that we've started working on is this thing called SIMD
in Jitter, and that's our JSON iterable
parser library that I was talking about.
SIMD stands for Single Instruction Multiple Data.
It basically means that you can do operations faster
and that's with this kind of vectorization approach.
I certainly don't claim to be an expert in SIMD
but I know that it's improving our
validation speeds in the
department of JSON parsing, so that's something that we're hoping to
support for a broader set
of architectures going forward.
Yeah, that's really cool. Almost like what Pandas does
for Python, instead of looping over in validation
and doing something to each piece, you just go, "This whole column,
multiply it by two."
I'm sure it's not implemented the same, but conceptually the same.
Just to be clear.
Very much so. And then the other two things in the pipeline that I'm going to mention
are kind of related once again to the
avoiding materializing things in Python if we can.
We're even kind of extending that to avoiding materializing
things in Rust if we don't have to.
The first thing is, when we're parsing JSON in Rust, can we just
do the validation as we kind of chomp through the JSON
instead of materializing the JSON as
a Rust object and then doing all the validation?
Can we just do it in one pass?
Is that almost like generators
and iterables rather than loading all into memory
at once and then processing it one at a time?
Yeah, exactly. And it's kind of like,
do you build the tree and then walk it three times
or do you just do your operations every time you
add something to the tree?
And then the last performance improvement in the pipeline that I'll mention is
this thing called FastModel. It has not been released yet.
It hasn't really even been significantly developed,
but this is cool in that it's really approaching
that kind of laziness concept again.
So, attributes would remain in Rust after validation until
they're requested. So this is kind of along the lines of the
defer/build logic that we were talking about in terms of
we're not going to send you the data or perform the necessary
operations until they're requested.
Right. Okay. Yeah, if you don't ever access the field,
then why process all that stuff and convert it
into Python objects?
Yeah, exactly. But yeah, we're kind of just excited in general
to be looking at lots of performance improvements
on our end, even after the big V2 speedup. Still have lots of
other things to work on and improve.
Yeah, it sure seems like it. And
if this free-threaded Python thing takes off,
who knows? Maybe there's even more craziness
with parallel processing
of different branches of the model
alongside each other.
Yeah. So I think this kind of
dovetails nicely into, like, you asked
earlier, is there a way that we kind of monitor the performance
improvements that we're making? And
we're currently using and getting started with
two tools that are really helpful.
And I can share some PRs if that's
helpful and send links after. But one of them is
CodSpeed, which integrates
super nicely with CI
and GitHub. And it basically runs tests
tagged with this benchmark tag.
And then it'll run them on
main compared to on your branch. And then you can see, like,
"Oh, this made my code 30% slower.
Maybe let's not merge that right away."
Or conversely, if there's a 30%
improvement on some of your benchmarks, it's really nice to kind of track
that.
This is at codspeed.io, right?
Yeah.
And then it sets up as, say, a GitHub action as part of your
CI/CD and probably automatically
runs when a PR is open and things along those lines, right?
Yep, exactly.
All right, I've never heard of this.
But if it just does the performance testing for yourself
and you're like, "Oh, this is great. I'm going to try this out,"
then why not, right? Let it do that.
Yeah. And then I guess another tool
that I'll mention while
talking about kind of our, you know,
continuous optimization is one word for it
is this tool kind of similarly named
called CodeFlash.
So CodeFlash is a new tool that
we're using to develop potentially more performant versions,
kind of analyze those in terms of, you know,
is this new code passing existing tests?
Is it passing additional tests that we write?
And then another great thing that it does
is open PRs for you with those improvements and then
explain the improvements. So I think it's a
really pioneering tool in the space and we're
excited to kind of experiment with it more on our
own in our repository.
I love it. Just tell me why is this,
why did this slow down? Well, here's why.
Yeah, exactly. And they offer both
like local runs of the tool and also
built-in CI support. So
those are just kind of two tools that we use to use and are
increasingly using to help us
kind of check our performance as we continue to develop
and really inspire us to get those green
check marks with the performance improved on
lots of PRs. Yeah, the more you can have it where
if it passes the automated build,
it's just ready to go and you don't have to
worry a little bit and keep testing things and then have
uncertainty, you know that.
That's nice, right? Gives you a lot of, lets you rest
and sleep at night. Yeah, most certainly.
I mean, I said it before, but the
number of people who are impacted by
Pydantic, I don't know what that number is, but it has
to be tremendous because if there's 400,000 projects that
use it, like think of the users of those projects, right?
That multiple has got to be big for,
I'm sure there's some really popular ones. For example, FastAPI.
Yeah, and it's just nice
to know that there are other companies
and tools out there that can help us to
really boost the performance benefits for all those users,
which is great.
That is really cool. I think, you know, let's talk about one more
performance benefit for people
and not so much in how fast your code runs,
but in how fast you go from
raw data to Pydantic models.
So one thing,
we may have even spoken about this before,
are you familiar with JSON to Pydantic?
Yeah, it's a really cool tool.
Yeah, it's such a cool tool. And if you've got some really complicated data,
like let's see, I'll pull up some
weather data that's in JSON format or something, right?
Like if you just take this
and you throw it in here, just don't even have to pretty print it,
it'll just go, "Okay, well, it looks like what we've got is
this really complicated nested model here."
And it took, you know, we did this while I was talking,
it took 10 seconds for me clicking the API to get a response
to having a pretty decent representation here.
Yeah, it's great in terms of
developer agility, especially, right?
It's like, "Oh, I've heard of this tool called Pydantic.
I've seen it in places. I don't really know if I want to manually
go build all these models for my super complicated JSON data."
And it's like, "Oh, I've got to do this.
I've got to do this. I've got to do this."
And it's like, "Oh, I've got to do this. I've got to do this."
And if you have a piece of JSON data and you say, "Convert that to Pydantic,"
you'll get really good results.
You have a little more control over than what you just get with this tool.
But I think those two things, while not about run-time performance,
going from, "I have data," to, "I'm working with Pydantic,"
that's pretty awesome.
Yeah, definitely.
And if any passionate open-source contributors are listening
and want to create a CLI tool for doing this locally,
I think this is based on something that I don't use,
but I think it's based on this data model code generator,
which I think might be a CLI tool or a library.
Let's see. Yes.
Oh, yeah. Very nice.
But here's the problem, though. You go and define a YAML file.
It's just not as easy as, "There's a text field. I paste in my stuff."
But it does technically work, I suppose.
Yeah.
But no, definitely the LLM approach or just the basic website approach
is very quick, which is nice.
Yeah. Speaking of LLMs, just really quick,
you get some of the Python newsletters and other places,
like, "Here's the cool new packages."
A lot of them are like, 9 out of 10 of them are about LLMs these days.
That feels a little over the top to me,
but I know there's other things going on in the world.
I know there's a lot of code development and coding these days.
I know you write a lot of code and think about it a lot
and probably use LLM somewhere in there.
Yeah, no, for sure.
I'm pretty optimistic and excited about it.
I think there's a lot of good that can be done
and a lot of productivity boosting to be had
from integrating with these tools,
both in your local development environment and also just in general.
I think the performance department, like we can see with CodeFlash,
using LLMs to help you write
for performance code can also be really useful.
It's been exciting to see some libraries really leverage
Pydantic as well in that space in terms of validating LLM outputs
or even using LLM calls
in Pydantic validators to validate
data along constraints that are more
language model friendly.
I'm optimistic about it.
I still have a lot to learn, but it's cool to see
the variety of applications and where you can plug in Pydantic
in that process for fun.
I totally agree. Right now, the context window,
how much you can give it as information
then to start asking questions is still a little bit small.
You can't give it some huge program and say,
"Find me the bugs where this function is called,"
and not quite understand enough all at once.
That thing keeps growing, so eventually, someday, we'll all see.
Yep.
All right.
Let's talk just for a minute, maybe real quick,
about what you all are doing at Pydantic,
the company, rather than Pydantic, the open source library.
What do you all got going on there?
Yeah, sure.
The company has released our first commercial tool.
It's called LogFire, and it's in open beta.
It's an observability platform,
and we'd really encourage anyone interested to try it out.
It's super easy to get started with,
just the basic pip install of the SDK,
and then start using it in your code base.
Then we have the LogFire dashboard
where you're going to see the observability and results.
We adopt this needle in the haystack philosophy,
where we want this to be a very easy-to-use
observability platform that offers
very Python-centric insights.
It's this opinionated wrapper around open telemetry,
if folks are familiar with that.
But in the context of performance,
one of the great things about this tool
is that it offers this nested logging and profiling structure
for code.
It can be really helpful in looking at your code
and being like, "We don't know where this performance
slowdown is occurring, but if we integrate with LogFire,
we can see that very easily in the dashboard."
You have some interesting approaches,
specifically targeting popular frameworks,
like instrument FastAPI or something like that, right?
Yeah, definitely.
Trying to build integrations that work very well
with FastAPI, other tools like that,
and even also offering custom features in the dashboard.
If you're using an observability tool,
you're probably advanced enough to want to add some extra things
to your dashboard, and we're working on supporting that
with fast UI, which I know you've chatted with Samuel about as well.
Yeah, absolutely.
I got a chance to talk to Samuel about
LogFire and some of the behind-the-scenes infrastructure.
It was really interesting.
But also, speaking of fast UI,
I did speak to him. When was that? Back in February?
Yeah.
This is a really popular project, and even on the...
I was like...
Quite a few people decided that they were interested
in even watching the video on that one.
Anything with fast UI?
Sorry, did you say anything with fast UI?
Yeah.
Are you doing anything on the fast UI side, or are you on the
Pydantic side of things?
Yeah, good question. I've been working mostly on Pydantic.
Larger user base, more feature requests,
but I've done a little bit on the fast UI side
and excited to brush up on my TypeScript
and build that out as a more robust and supported tool.
I think, especially as we grow as a company and have more
open source support in general, that'll be a priority for us,
which is exciting.
Yeah, it's an interesting project.
Basically, a cool way to do
JavaScript front ends and React and then plug those back into
Python APIs like
FastAPI and those types of things, right?
Yeah, and kind of a similarity with fast UI and LogFire,
the new tool, is that there's pretty seamless integration with
Pydantic, which is definitely going to be one of the core
tenets of any products or open source things that we're
producing in the future.
Yeah, I can imagine that's something you want to pay special
attention to, is how well do these things fit together as a
whole, rather than just, "Here's something interesting.
Here's something interesting."
That pretty much wraps it up for the time that we have to talk
today.
Let's close it out for us with maybe a final call to action
for people who are already using Pydantic
and they want it to go faster, or maybe they could adopt some
of these tips. What do you tell them?
Yeah, I would say
inform yourself just a little bit about
the Pydantic architecture, just in terms of
what is core schema and why are we using Rust
for validation and serialization?
Then that can take you to the next steps of
when do I want to build my core schemas based on the nature of my
application? Is it okay if imports take a little bit longer, or
do I want to delay that? Then take a look at
discriminated unions. Then maybe, if you're
really interested in improving performance across your application
that supports Pydantic and other things,
try out LogFire and just see what sort of benefits you can get there.
Yeah, see where you're spending your time is
one of the very,
not just focused on Pydantic, but in general,
our intuition is often pretty bad for
where is your code slow and where is it not slow?
You're like, "That looks really complicated. That must be slow."
Nope, it's that one call to some sub-module that you didn't realize
was terrible.
I guess that circles back to the LLM
tools and integrated performance
analysis with Codd Speed and CodeFlash and even just other
LLM tools, which is like, "Use the tools you have at hand."
Sometimes they're better at performance
improvements than you might be, or it can at least give you good tips that give you
a launching point, which is great.
For sure, or even good old C-profile built right in,
if you want to do it that way.
Awesome.
Sydney, thank you for being back on the show and sharing all these tips.
Congratulations on all the work you and the team are doing.
What a success Pydantic is.
Yeah, thank you so much for having me.
It was wonderful to get to have this discussion with you and excited that I got to
meet you in person at PyCon recently as well.
Yeah, that was really great.
Until next PyCon, see you later.
Bye.